docs: Rework the Custom Plugins page (#6128)
graphql-hive/console: packages/web/docs/src/pages/docs/gateway/other-features/plugins.mdx

you should pick `@graphql-mesh/prometheus` plugin. It is built on top of Yoga and Envelop variants,
but adds monitoring capabilities of upstream subgraphs.

For the most used features, you will not have to explicitly setup the dedicated plugin. They will be
added automatically based on your gateway configuration.

## Configuration

You can add plugins to your gateway using the `plugins` option.

It have to be a function, which will be called each time the gateway have update its configuration.
For example, if polling is enabled, this function will be called for each poll.

Most Hive Gateway plugins takes an object as a parameter, and expect some common components like a
`logger`, a `pubsub`, etc... Those components are given in parameters to the `plugins` function. It
is advised to spread the plugin's factory context into the plugins options, this way plugins will
have access to all components they need.

```ts filename="gateway.config.ts"
import { useGraphQLJit } from '@envelop/graphql-jit'
import { defineConfig } from '@graphql-hive/gateway'
import useNewRelic from '@graphql-mesh/plugin-newrelic'

export const gatewayConfig = defineConfig({
  plugins: ctx => [

>     useGraphQLJit(),

Author: Do you have an idea of which plugin I could add ?

>     useGraphQLJit(),

Reviewer: SOFA?

to your company.

A good entry-point for discovering how to write Gateway plugins is to look at the source code of the
existing plugins maintained by us.

A plugin is an object that can define methods to hook into different phases or events of the gateway
lifecycle. Each hook will receive a single parameter, the hook payload, containing data related to
the hooked phase and functions allowing you to modify the behavior of this phase.

There are 2 categories of hooks:

- Gateway lifecycle hooks: they are related to the lifecycle or events of the server itself and is
  not related to a specific request.
- Request lifecycle hooks: they are tight to a specific phase of a specific request. Those hooks
  always give access to the related request in there payload.

### Gateway lifecycle

Gateway lifecycle allows to setup long running services, initialize in-memory cache or stores, react
to general events.

#### `onYogaInit`

It is the very first hook called just before the underlying GraphQL Yoga instance starts listening
for HTTP requests.

##### Possible usages

You can use this hook to customize the Yoga instance.

##### API

> - `yoga`: the Graphql Yoga `YogaServer` instance that is about to start.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `yoga`: `YogaServer` instance that is about to start with the gateway.
```
Maybe

    onExecute: <a href="#onexecute">onExecute</a>
    onSubscribe: <a href="#onsubscribe">onSubscribe</a>

    onExecuteDone: <a href="#onexecutedone"> onExecuteDone</a>
    onSubscribeDone: <a href="#onsubscribedone">onSubscribeDone</a>
    onExecutionResult: <a href="#onexecutionresult">onExecutionResult</a>
    onResultProcess: <a href="#onresultprocess">onResultProcess</a>

    [*] --> onRequestParse
    onRequestParse --> onParams
    onParams --> onEnveloped
    onEnveloped --> onParse
    onParse --> onValidate
    onValidate --> onContextBuilding
    onContextBuilding --> onExecute
    onContextBuilding --> onSubscribe

    onExecute --> SubgraphDelegation
    onSubscribe --> SubgraphDelegation

    SubgraphDelegation: Subgraph Delegation
    state SubgraphDelegation {
      onDelegationPlan: <a href="#ondelegationplan">onDelegationPlan</a>
      onDelegationStageExecute: <a href="#ondelegationstageexecute">onDelegationStageExecute</a>
      onSubgraphExecute: <a href="#onsubgraphexecute">onSubgraphExecute</a>
      onSubgraphExecuteDone: <a href="#onsubgraphexecutedone">onSubgraphExecuteDone</a>

      [*] --> onDelegationPlan

>       onDelegationPlan --> onDelegationStageExecute

Reviewer: Not sure if worth to mention but plan can be memoized so this hook is not always called.

Author: Ho, so only the `onDelegationStageExecute` is mandatory ?

If it's cached, `onDelegationPlan` is not called at all ?

Reviewer: >Ho, so only the onDelegationStageExecute is mandatory ?

It is always called

>If it's cached, onDelegationPlan is not called at all ?

No it is not if I don't miss anything.

      onDelegationStageExecute --> onSubgraphExecute
      onSubgraphExecute --> onSubgraphExecuteDone

> 

Author: I don't know, I removed it because it depends on the transport you are using. `onFetch` is not called for all subgraphs

> 

Reviewer: We can put (HTTP only) maybe?

There are 2 categories of hooks:

- Gateway lifecycle hooks: they are related to the lifecycle or events of the server itself and is
  not related to a specific request.
- Request lifecycle hooks: they are tight to a specific phase of a specific request. Those hooks
  always give access to the related request in there payload.

### Gateway lifecycle

Gateway lifecycle allows to setup long running services, initialize in-memory cache or stores, react
to general events.

<div className="[&_a]:text-primary [&_a]:underline [&_a:hover]:no-underline [&_a]:decoration-from-font [&_a]:[text-underline-position:from-font]">

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
  onYogaInit: <a href="#onyogainit">onYogaInit</a>
  onPluginInit: <a href="#onplugininit">onPluginInit</a>
  onDispose: <a href="#ondispose">onDispose</a>
  listening: Listening for HTTP requests

  [*] --> onYogaInit
  onYogaInit --> onPluginInit
  onPluginInit --> listening
  listening --> onDispose: Gateway is shutting down

  note left of listening: <a href="#onschemachange">onSchemaChange</a> called for each new schema loaded
  note left of listening: <a href="#onfetch">onFetch</a> called for each outgoing HTTP request

> ```

Author: Not sure about how much this diagram is clear.

@Urigo what do you think ?

I'm not sure how to represent the fact that both `onFetch` and `onSchemaChange` can be called at any time during the lifetime of the gateway.

---
description: Add feature or third party integrations with Hive Gateway plugin system.
---

import { Callout } from '@theguild/components'

# Plugins

Hive Gateway is built with an highly modular architecture. The core is as small as possible, and
most of the feature are built around a plugin system.

A plugin can hook into each important steps of the lifecycle of the gateway, including the graphql
request execution.

The gateway is built using Graphql Yoga (a GraphQL HTTP server) and Envelop (a GraphQL execution
orchestrator), which are also highly modular technologies. Hive Gateway is extending Yoga and
Envelop plugin system by providing gateway specific hooks.

> This means that if a plugin exists in multiple variants, you should follow this priority order:

Author: It's because if they want to use a plugin, it can exists in multiple variants. The Prometheus plugin is a good example of this. You have to choose the correct variant to have access to the best of it.

In the other hand, we have plugins that exists only in the envelop variant, like Sentry. So we have to some way say that you can use Envelop or Yoga plugins too.

> This means that if a plugin exists in multiple variants, you should follow this priority order:

Reviewer 2: Maybe this is also a technical details that we don't need them to be aware of?
why not create a gateway variant for any plugin users might need?

> This means that if a plugin exists in multiple variants, you should follow this priority order:

Author: I do agree. IMO, we should just have one package for a plugin. Then, it should be up to the plugin to handle the fact that some hooks are optionally called, depending on where they are used.

Yet, it's not the case today, so what do we do ? Should we document this point until we refactor plugins ?

import { defineConfig } from '@graphql-hive/gateway'
import useNewRelic from '@graphql-mesh/plugin-newrelic'

export const gatewayConfig = defineConfig({
  plugins: ctx => [
    useGraphQLJit(),
    useNewRelic({
      ...ctx
      // other options
    })
  ]
})
```

## Custom Plugins

You can take advantage of the plugin system to create your own custom plugin. This allows you to
integrate your gateway with any technology that we don't officially support, being public or private
to your company.

A good entry-point for discovering how to write Gateway plugins is to look at the source code of the
existing plugins maintained by us.

A plugin is an object that can define methods to hook into different phases or events of the gateway
lifecycle. Each hook will receive a single parameter, the hook payload, containing data related to
the hooked phase and functions allowing you to modify the behavior of this phase.

There are 2 categories of hooks:

- Gateway lifecycle hooks: they are related to the lifecycle or events of the server itself and is
  not related to a specific request.
- Request lifecycle hooks: they are tight to a specific phase of a specific request. Those hooks

>   always give access to the related request in there payload.

Reviewer 2: I think a mermid chart of the hooks would be nice here

Reviewer: Like the one below in 184th line?

Reviewer: It is possible to see with `View File`;
https://github.com/graphql-hive/console/blob/3ed148ed148ef8677be8e4d927e35fd1951be88b/packages/web/docs/src/pages/docs/gateway/other-features/plugins.mdx
GitHub is able to show mermaid graphs.

Author: There is a mermaid chart for the Request lifecycle. I was not sure yet if a Gateway lifecycle graph would be helpfull, but I can make one if you think so

Author: I've added a diagram for the gateway lifecycle, let me know what you think about it
